# beyond the bifurcation of imagination

Reading Amy Kind and Peter Kung's magnificent edited work _Knowledge Through Imagination_, and am thinking through it's implications.  For Kind/Kung, their goal in the text is to lift up the instructive implications of the imagination over and beyond the transcendent capabilities.  

The problem with the transcendent capabilities of the imagination is its ability to disengage with the limitations of this worldly experience.  That is, there are no constraints in the transcendent imagination (fantasy).  This poses problems for both Kind/Kung because knowledge formation cannot find its derivation in the imagination.  Kind/Kung look to find compatibility within the two forms of imagination by turning the faculty of imagination into a constrained imagination, limited by the ideas and things that the self gives into it.  This allows for a focused thought for possibility in accessing new knowledge.

Although I am fond of it, and do not neglect it (I think this is necessary!), I see that what is missing is a relational approach to the imagination that is more known in the works of John Sallis, and hidden within Alfred North Whitehead's work.  It is a relational imagination which blurs the boundary between transcendent and instructive, and allows for the connections of other actual occasions, entities, to dictate and develop knowledge.  For instance, Sallis calls for a form of gazing at a space, which is the entrance to the imagination, as gazing provides the space for in depth viewing of the entity down to the elementals, the most basic of all things.  And even then we are not seeing the origins, but rather the manifestations of the entity realized, the thing in itself.

Alfred North Whitehead offers a similar response in the concrescing of actual occasions, in which they become possibilities seeking a response.  Instead of beings, we are becomings, always in process, and thus always being introduced into possibilities.  Experiences therefore become important for our becoming, to be prehended and felt for a form of analysis towards satisfaction.  But in our becoming we are just possibilities waiting to become.  And when we become, we become actual, a datum for every other becoming.  This is the imaginative generalization of actual occasions Whitehead is trying to get at: we are imaginative becomings, not repetitions, but becoming new at each moment because we are not the exact same things pertaining to time and space.  The facts that we categorize are "bare facts" to Whitehead, and thus have a facticity because of the evaluation we give to it.  It becomes valuable.  And thus what we value is because of an imaginative undertaking of imaginative feeling, one that is not untrue, but is not yet fully realized.  This makes it both transcendent and instructive, as we have not yet been (becoming, transcendent), and yet is instructive for the future of the actual occasion as a datum for feeling (the superjective feeling of the actual occasion as actualized).  So for Whitehead imagination is integral for any becoming for without it, the act of becoming is mere repetition.

#AmyKind #PeterKung #JohnSallis #AlfredNorthWhitehead #imagination #repetition #actualoccasion #transcendentimagination #instructiveimagination #nonbifurcationofimagination
