# reading the world

Part of my dissertation is looking at the role imagination takes in understanding, making sense of the world.  This is against a solely logical understanding of the world, imagination as a different way of "logicizing" the world itself.

In the reading of *After Prophecy* by Tom Cheetham, I took a pause in reading this phenomenal piece.  I wanted to share it here:

> It seems clear that in many segments of modern society the habits and skills of literate culture are in fact being lost, but they are being replaced by an immersion of the soul in technological gadgetry and media-controlled capitalism, which only exacerbates our isolation from nature and from other persons.

Powerful quote.  technology and media, controlled by capitalism, which doubly shapes how we see and what we see, isolates us from nature and people.  Cheetham writes that we, as Steiner and Illich propose, should have

> cells of resistance, "houses of reading" where the habits of mind of a bookish civilization can endure.

This is essential for the preservation of humanity.  But Cheetham goes one step further:

> The Cosmos itself is a "house of reading:–it is the Primordial Temple of the Word.

How can one open oneself this?  How do we return?  is it just reading?  No, it is a seeking, a passive seeking, or a following of a guide, or the opening up to "mystical poverty," and a renunciation to seek power, to have power.

This changes the function and role of imagination.  Imagination has often been used as a space for an idea to take shape, the idea being the bridge.  In this case, it is the imagination which is the bridge, in which one relinquishes control and is set on a path in which the imagination leads into the imaginal realm, where two worlds meet, the two worlds of the actual and possible, the actual and the divine.  

The imagination becomes the organ to enter the imaginal realm.  Interesting use of the word organ.  One still cannot fathom the mystery of how, internally an organ, our internal organs, can take foods digested, or air, and transform them in such a way so that it is useful for us.  Sure we can scientifically break it down, but it doesn't talk about life itself, meaning, etc.  Nevertheless, organs function to "transform" one from the actual world to the imaginal, to see in a different way, that allows one to realize, to understand, uniquely.  I say uniquely because, like Cheetham, we make sense of the world, of events, of the things around us.  In our analysis, we find what makes sense to us concerning it.  But this too is the novelty of the event, since in making sense of it, one cannot claim the same things with another person, but rather, in the mirroring that takes shape within our forming of the event, one makes something new of it.  Thus novelty, difference, exist in the process of imagination.

Technology, although helpful, may take us away from the reality of our novelty making system.  Technology, if controlled by capitalism, distills the function or reality of nature, leaving to only one response, the one logic of truth.  And that simply is not the case.

Houses of reading as modes or cells of resistance are necessary for the vitality of humanity.  Reading *viva voce,* word of mouth, out loud, adds to the power of words, as they help contain the images that can be lifted into the structure forming in the imagination.

With this in mind, what can we read from the world?  The Cosmos?  What is it saying to us?  Is it distilled?  Or is it speaking so loudly that we cannot hear it?  Maybe we need to open our minds, to see our mystical poverty, and seek out, journey, adventure, the words of the cosmos.

