# the imagination whitehead is seeking

Been writing on Whitehead today, primarily on the subject of the Bifurcation of Nature in his _The Concept of Nature_.  In one of the text he writes that the problem is not that there is a spiritual world of unrealized ideals and an world of unspiritual facts.  Rather, it is the common sense coupled with limiited knowledge put together by the imagination.  

This is really interesting.  He resists any form of bifurcation (spirit/matter), by relegating the issue to the limit of knowledge.  But one would think he is also belittling the imagination, when he, in my opinion, is not.  In _Process and Reality_ he states we need an imaginative leap.  Hardly a removal or problem of the imagination.  And yet I think he is not talking about the imagination that is commonly understood in the Kantian sense.

The Kantian concept of the imagination, at least in his anthropological understanding of it, is that there are two forms of the imagination: the first the reproductive imagination, the second the productive imagination.  He also writes that the productive requires the reproductive in some way because we can never create without images to work with.  But the productive seems a sort of postmodern rehashing, in where we are creating from what is already there, and therefore not really new, but the same in a different way.  Not that I find that an issue.

The reproductive imagination just brings back from memory what is desired, the productive makes what is desired.  Whitehead doesn't want to bifurcate anything, but show the relations of all things.  So, the imagination should not be disconnected from one another, but rather be an imagination with relations of things.  There can be no reproductive with a productive imagination, and there can be no productive without some form of reproductive (I'm thinking _creatio ex profundis_) imagination.  The imagination is like the receptacle, a space by which things become.  A holding place, a place of becoming.

And yet, this is not solely a mental conceptual thing going on.  The images are not, so to speak, like the representations as gone against by Foucault or Derrida.  Even Deleuze shows the limits of a certain imagination in the image of thought.  Imagination is the faculty, the space, of the becoming, and is not held by an image of thought, but emerges from the process itself.  It hides and shows when necessary, it creates and disappears in the blink of an eye, and yet one cannot, in some way function without it.

The imagination must be processual, that is, it comes from the relations of things and thus the necessity of an emergence, a possibility.  It can be neither productive, nor reproductive, but must be both.  In its reproductive sense, it lures one into productivity; in its productive sense, it lures one into reproductive rememberance.  It is the integration, gazing, and emergence of the thing.  Nature, for Whitehead, should not be bifurcated between matter and spirit, neither should the function of the imagination, which feels and relates the connectivity of things into us, a prehension of things, for feeling.

#whitehead
#imagination
#kant
#productiveimagination
#reproductiveimagination
#processimagination


