# thoughts on david griffin's deep religious pluralism

This text centers and deepens the discussion espoused by John Cobb from his texts _Christ in a Pluralistic Age, The Structure of Christian Experience, and Beyond Dialogue_ to name a few.  Griffin argues against an exclusivist, inclusivist and identist form of pluralism, as each negates, in some sense as well as degree, something of the other in its formulation.  For instance, in Stephen Longs text on a Whiteheadian Hindu pluralism, he deals with the difficulty of Rahner’s identist pluralism, that it encloses all of humanity within a Catholic formation of universal salvation.  What is not seen, or what is hidden, is that Rahner, as well as others who hold to an exclusivist, inclusivist, or identist position, is that it argues for their own ultimate reality.  Going back to Long, some issues of Vedantic hinduism suggests that regardless of the religion, all is hindu.  This suggests that all hold to a religious ultimate, and that the differences are of the material, or secondary aspects. 
 
This is a difficult problem with no easy resolve.  One of the interesting responses espoused by Cobb and further expanded by Griffin in this text is that their are two religious ultimates, Creativity, and God.  Thus there is space for a diversity of metaphors from religion that can hold to these ultimates.  There can be more ultimate realities.    What Griffin wants to espouse in deep pluralism is that one “can hold fast to the universal validity of our own norms without insisting that these norms are the only ones with universal validity.”  Cobb also writes that when one enters dialogue, “we do not need to relativize our beliefs, rather we can affirm our insights as univesally valid!  What we cannot do, without lapsing back into unjustified arrogance, is to deny that the insight of other traditions are also universally valid.”  What makes this interesting is that just as the divine encounter within ones own religion is important, thus creating what we know as ones own ultimate reality, we must also admit that the other also encounters the divine, and experiences the divine, and thus they too derive an ultimate reality from that experience.  It makes one realize that ones own religion, although it is a tradition and one which contains that which remains, that which is permanent, is also changing and growing, it is in itself in process!  And thus it becomes open to the world around it, other religions, cultures, political pulls, etc., which force it to constantly rethink and reconstruct itself in light of new experiences. 